Initial draft of the 'collaborating with newcomers' episode. (#21)
carpentries/lesson-development-training: episodes/22-external.md

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

> ## Documenting your lesson

Reviewer: This is the first of two episodes on collaboration skills: a pretty dramatic change of focus from the previous section, reflecting on teaching the lesson. I would like to include some introductory text about collaboration skills, before jumping right into the episode content. Maybe something framing these two episodes in the context of the training as a whole, and explaining how collaboration can benefit the development and maintenance of the lesson. In particular, for this episode I think it would be good to include a couple sentences explaining why it is worth taking time to make a project welcoming to newcomers.

Happy to help write some of this if you would like me to. Perhaps better kept to a separate PR?

Author: Sounds like a good idea @tobyhodges. I think I have now addressed every other comment on this PR and unless I draft an intro before you do another review - I will do it as a separate PR which may be easier to review/modify/discuss on.

Author: Done in 6469b75.

  - **rendered version of the lesson** - even though this is typically included in the `About` section of the repository, it is always useful to link to the URL where the rendered lesson is visible.
  - **contact information** - include email addresses or mailing lists or other details on how to get in touch with the lesson maintainers.
  - **contributing** - this is an opportunity to list what kinds of contribution are sought and how to get involved in lesson development for new contributors. You can provide more details in a separate `CONTRIBUTING.md` file within the repository’s root directory and link to it from `README`.
  - **credits/acknowledgements** - make sure to credit those who have helped in the lesson's development or inspired it, and/or any resources/templates that you have reused. You can also link to a separate `AUTHORS.md` file within the repository’s root directory to list all the people who contributed to the lesson content (if this list starts to become too large to include in the `README` itself).

>   - **citation** - it’s a very good idea to specify a reference to an appropriate academic publication so others can cite the use of the lesson in their own publications and media. A common practice is to include the citation information in a separate `CITATION.md` file within the repository’s root directory and link to it from `README`.

Reviewer: pinging @zkamvar for a review on this point: I know there is discussion of switching over to `CITATION.cff` format - is that something we need to consider/be aware of while drafting this curriculum?

Author: Good point, GitHub has adopted the .cff citation format. As an aside, many SSI's fellows and collaborators are involved in the [cff project](https://github.com/citation-file-format/citation-file-format).

Author: Addressed via f4fd959.

>   - **licence** - a short description of and a link to the lessons’s licence typically contained in a separate `LICENSE.md` file within the repository’s root directory.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - **license** - a short description of and a link to the lesson’s license typically contained in a separate `LICENSE.md` file within the repository’s root directory.
```

Author: Fixed via 517e72e.

>   - **licence** - a short description of and a link to the lessons’s licence typically contained in a separate `LICENSE.md` file within the repository’s root directory.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - **licence** - a short description of and a link to the lessons’s licence typically contained in a separate `LICENSE.md` file within the repository’s root directory. The lesson repository already contains a `LICENSE.md` file, but you should modify this to more accurately describe who should be credited for any of the lesson content that is re-used by others.
```

Author: Accepted suggestion.

### Instructions for contributors - `CONTRIBUTING.md`

> `CONTRIBUTING.md` is a file within the repository's root directory where you should provide detailed description of the ways people can send their contributions, what kinds of contribution will be credited and in what ways. For example, at what point would someone be listed as an author and how you will credit contributions that are not recorded in the commit history of the project. The latter is particularly important for newcomers who may not be proficient with the use of GitHub's features for collaborative work, such as issues, mentions, pull requests and code review, but could still provide valuable input and contributions.

Reviewer: Lesson repositories already have a generic Carpentries `CONTRIBUTING.md` file. I think we should mention that, and describe how and why participants might want to modify it.

Author: Addressed vi d68d785.

### Issue and pull request templates

> Consider setting up issue and pull request templates to help newcomers who may not have much experience working on collaborative projects in GitHub. Such templates will prompt them to fill in answers to pre-set questions, which will help raise issues or submit pull requests in a way that’s clear, helpful and provides enough information for maintainers to act upon (without going back and forth to extract it). GitHub provides a range of default templates, but you can also [write your own](https://docs.github.com/en/communities/using-templates-to-encourage-useful-issues-and-pull-requests/configuring-issue-templates-for-your-repository).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Consider setting up issue and pull request templates to help newcomers who may not have much experience working on collaborative projects in GitHub. Such templates can provide a structure for the issue/pull request description, and/or prompt them to fill in answers to pre-set questions. Both can help contributors raise issues or submit pull requests in a way that is clear, helpful and provides enough information for maintainers to act upon (without going back and forth to extract it). GitHub provides a range of default templates, but you can also [write your own](https://docs.github.com/en/communities/using-templates-to-encourage-useful-issues-and-pull-requests/configuring-issue-templates-for-your-repository).
```

### Other documentation

> Once have set up the basic documentation about your lesson, you may consider adding the following useful information to your documentation too:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once you have set up the basic documentation about your lesson, you may consider adding the following useful information to your documentation too:
```

> - set-up guides for installing and rendering the lesson locally

Reviewer: we should add a link here to instructions for this. probably https://carpentries.github.io/sandpaper-docs/, right @zkamvar?

Reviewer 2: Correct!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- set-up guides for installing and rendering the lesson locally. In most cases, a link to [The Carpentries Workbench documentation](https://carpentries.github.io/sandpaper-docs/) will be sufficient.
```

- **lesson title**
- **lesson description**
- **rendered version of the lesson** - even though this is typically included in the `About` section of the repository, it is always useful to link to the URL where the rendered lesson is available
- **contact information** - include up-to-date email addresses or mailing lists or other details on how to get in touch with the lesson maintainers
- **contributing information** - this is an opportunity to list what kinds of contribution are sought and how to get involved in lesson development for new contributors. You can provide more details in a separate `CONTRIBUTING` file within the repository’s root directory and link to it from `README`
- **credits/acknowledgements** - make sure to credit those who have helped in the lesson's development or inspired it, and/or any resources/templates that you have reused. You can also link to a separate `AUTHORS.md` file within the repository’s root directory to list all the people who contributed to the lesson content (if this list starts to become too large to include in the `README` itself)

> - **citation** - it is a very good idea to specify a reference to an appropriate academic publication so others can cite the use of the lesson in their own publications and media. A common practice is to include the citation information in a separate `CITATION` file within the repository’s root directory and link to it from `README`. Citation can be contained in a plain text file (`CITATION`, `CITATION.txt`), a Markdown file (`CITATION.md`), or in the recently adopted [Citation File Format](https://github.com/citation-file-format/citation-file-format) file (`CITATION.cff`). The CFF is defined using [YAML](http://yaml.org/spec/1.2.2/) (which is another text-based format) and is now the recommended way of storing citations in GitHub. Advantages of using CFF are that GitHub will automatically show the citation information in the sidebar, making it more visible and accessible for visitors to your repository. In addition, metadata from `CITATION.cff` files will automatically be used by Zenodo if you publish your lesson/project there, and is recognisible by Zotero reference manager as well.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **citation** - it is a very good idea to specify a reference to an appropriate academic publication so others can cite the use of the lesson in their own publications and media. A common practice is to include the citation information in a separate `CITATION` file within the repository’s root directory and link to it from `README`. Citation can be contained in a plain text file (`CITATION`, `CITATION.txt`), a Markdown file (`CITATION.md`), or in the recently adopted [Citation File Format](https://github.com/citation-file-format/citation-file-format) (`CITATION.cff`). The CFF is defined using [YAML](http://yaml.org/spec/1.2.2/) (which we already encountered in the `config.yaml` file for the lesson website) and is now [the recommended way of storing citations in GitHub](https://github.blog/2021-08-19-enhanced-support-citations-github/). Advantages of using CFF are that GitHub will automatically show the citation information in the sidebar, making it more visible and accessible for visitors to your repository. In addition, metadata from `CITATION.cff` files will automatically be used by [Zenodo](https://zenodo.org/) if you publish your lesson/project there, and will be recognised by the Zotero reference manager as well.
```

Reviewer: I think we might need to mention DOIs and what you might put as citation info before a lesson has an full journal citation? Something for a separate PR, though. I'll open an issue...

Author: Yes - I was wondering what to do about DOIs and where to mention them. I will modify the above point to mention that the citation can contain a reference to an appropriate publication or a DOI. Many lessons might not be 'officially' published but we should encourage them to get a DOI at least.

Author: Mentioned DOIs in ecd5759.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

Groups of collaborators taking this training together should discuss first how they will assign these tasks between them.
```

Reviewer: The above is intended to make clear how this exercise should be tackled by groups of people working on the same lesson.

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

## Collaborating on a lesson

### Boosting the visibility and attracting new collaborators

> In addition to having the complete documentation in the lesson repository, the Carpentry community provides a number of ways to further raise the visibility of the lesson among the broader community and to encourage community members to contribute to its further development, for example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In addition to having the complete documentation in the lesson repository, The Carpentries community provides a number of ways to further raise the visibility of the lesson among the broader community and encourage community members to contribute to its further development. For example:
```

>   - listing the lesson on [The Carpentries Help Wanted page](https://carpentries.org/help-wanted-issues/)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - listing issues from the lesson repository on [The Carpentries Help Wanted page](https://carpentries.org/help-wanted-issues/)
```

  - featuring your lesson in [the Incubator Lesson Spotlight](https://docs.carpentries.org/topic_folders/lesson_development/spotlight.html)

>   - writing a blog post about the lesson for [the Carpentries Blog](https://carpentries.org/blog) or attending a community discussion call to promote the lesson

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - writing a blog post about the lesson for [The Carpentries Blog](https://carpentries.org/blog), and/or attending a community discussion call to promote the lesson
```

  - advertising the lesson at various Carpentries mailing lists - e.g. [general discussion](https://carpentries.topicbox.com/groups/discuss), [instructors](https://carpentries.topicbox.com/groups/instructors), regional communities or specific curriculum lists

> You should also consider submitting your lesson to [Hacktoberfest](https://hacktoberfest.digitalocean.com/) and similar wider community open source events aimed at encouraging people to contribute to open source projects periodically throughout the year.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You should also consider including your lesson in [Hacktoberfest](https://hacktoberfest.digitalocean.com/) and similar wider community open source events aimed at encouraging people to contribute to open source projects periodically throughout the year.
```

### Issue labelling for newcomers

> You can encourage contributions to your lesson from newcomers by using specific labels on issues to highlight suitable opportunities to help. Apply the `good first issue` or `help wanted` labels to issues in your repository to indicate that the maintainers will welcome help or pull requests fixing such issues.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can encourage contributions to your lesson from newcomers by using specific labels on issues to highlight suitable opportunities to help. Apply the `good first issue` or `help wanted` labels to issues in your repository to indicate that the maintainers will particularly welcome help or pull requests fixing such issues.
```

Check out [GitHub's documentation on setting notifications on individual repository](https://docs.github.com/en/account-and-profile/managing-subscriptions-and-notifications-on-github/setting-up-notifications/configuring-notifications#configuring-your-watch-settings-for-an-individual-repository). You can choose whether to watch or unwatch an individual repository, or can choose to only be notified of certain event types such as issues, pull requests, mentions, etc.

### Making progress

The following practices have been shown to help maintain steady progress with lesson development:

  - being responsive to notifications about activities and mentions
  - scheduling regular co-working/sprinting sessions with team members

>   - attaching your sprint sessions to other open source community activities, such as [Hacktoberfest](https://hacktoberfest.digitalocean.com/), which offer goodies, rewards and prizes for participants, will provide motivation and activity spikes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
attaching your sprint sessions to other open source community activities, which may offer goodies, rewards and prizes for participants, can provide motivation and activity spikes
```

I don't think we need to name-check Hacktoberfest twice.

>   - attaching your sprint sessions to other open source community activities, such as [Hacktoberfest](https://hacktoberfest.digitalocean.com/), which offer goodies, rewards and prizes for participants, will provide motivation and activity spikes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
attaching your sprint sessions to other open source community activities, which may offer goodies, rewards and prizes for participants, can provide motivation and activity spikes
```

I don't think we need to name-check Hacktoberfest twice.

>   - attending Carpentries Maintainer co-working/lesson development co-working sessions with people working on or maintaining other lessons

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - working alongside other members of The Carpentries community at Maintainer or lesson development co-working sessions
```

:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::: keypoints

> - *"If a project doesn’t make a good first impression, newcomers may wait a long time before giving it a second chance" - Karl Fogel, the author of ["Producing Open Source Software: How to Run a Successful Free Software Project"](https://www.oreilly.com/library/view/producing-open-source/0596007590/)*.

Reviewer: ❤️
